chore(concept): #521 revoked notification handling (#953)
catenax-ng/tx-traceability-foss: docs/concept/#521-revoked-notification-handling/#521-revoked-notification-handling.md

# Concept #521: Revoked notification handling

| Key           | Value                                                                 |
|---------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Author        | ds-crehm                                                              |
| Creation date | 24.01.2024                                                            |
| Ticket Id     | #521 https://github.com/eclipse-tractusx/traceability-foss/issues/521 |
| State         | WIP                                                                   |

# Table of Contents
1. [Overview](#overview)
2. [Summary](#summary)
3. [Problem Statement](#problem-statement)
4. [Requirements](#requirements)
5. [NFR](#nfr)
6. [Out of scope](#out-of-scope)
7. [Assumptions](#assumptions)
8. [Concept](#concept)
9. [Glossary](#glossary)
10. [References](#references)
11. [Additional Details](#additional-details)

# Overview

After a notification is created and approved, relevant policies must be verified before it can be sent.
There are three possibilities:
1. The policy is valid (validUntil >= current DateTime) and the notification is permitted to be sent.

> 2. The policy is valid (validUntil >= current DateTime) but the notification is **not** permitted to be sent.

Reviewer: Case 2 is not clear to me. There are two validity constraints, time based (policy expiration) and permission based (policy definition matched the policy of catalog offer)

3. The policy is **not** valid (validUntil < current DateTime) and the notification is **not** permitted to be sent (policy details are not relevant in this case).

> Policies are stored in the IRS. The IRS provides an API to fetch and verify policies.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Policies are stored in the IRS's PolicyStore. The IRS provides an PolicyStore API to create, fetch and verify policies.
```

# Summary

> When the notification is not sent because of a permission issue or an invalid policy, the user must be notified properly.

Reviewer: Permission issue in one constraint of an invalid policy 
invalid policy 
 - time based 
 - permission or constraint based

The status of the notification must be updated accordingly.

# Problem Statement

# Requirements

- During policy check, throw separate Exceptions based on the type of failure.
  - If policy is not valid -> UsagePolicyExpiredException
  - If policy is valid but notification not permitted -> UsagePolicyPermissionException
- New quality investigation & alert status: "Failed"
  - Notification set to this status, when it could not be sent due to the policy exceptions
- Pop-up informing the user of the exception
- Detailed status information stored in the message history of the notification
- User must be able to resend the notification

> # NFR

Reviewer: ```suggestion

```

> # Out of scope

Reviewer: ```suggestion

```

A message is stored in the message history, containing information about the exception.

```mermaid
sequenceDiagram
    participant TraceX
    participant IRSLib
    participant IRSPolicyStore
    TraceX->>TraceX: Create notification
    TraceX->>IRSLib: Get policy
    activate IRSLib
    IRSLib->>IRSPolicyStore: Get policy
    activate IRSPolicyStore
    IRSPolicyStore-->>IRSLib: Policy A(id,validUntil,permissions,...)
    deactivate IRSPolicyStore
    IRSLib-->>TraceX: Policy A (id,validUntil,permissions,...)
    deactivate IRSLib
    TraceX->>IRSLib: Verify notification with policy A
    activate IRSLib
    alt Success
        IRSLib-->>TraceX: Success
        TraceX->>TraceX: Send notification
    else Exception
        alt Notification rejected
            IRSLib-->>TraceX: UsagePolicyPermissionException
        else policy.validUntil<currentTime
            IRSLib-->>TraceX: UsagePolicyExpiredException
        end
        deactivate IRSLib
        TraceX->>TraceX: Notification status = Failed
        TraceX->>TraceX: Create error message
    end
```

### Frontend

After creating and approving the notification and one of the exceptions is thrown:

> 1. A pop-up must be shown to the user

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. An error toast message  must be shown to the user
```

> 2. The notification status must be changed to "Failed"

Reviewer: We have to think about a transient state model which extends the standardized notification model with additional states -. 

See https://eclipse-tractusx.github.io/traceability-foss/docs/user/user-manual.html Quality alert status this is standardized and could not be changed. There is no ERROR or FAILED state. We have to extend this official notification model with transient states which are only handled within the Trace-X application. Please provide a sample where FAILED will be inside the state diagram. Thanks

4. [Assumptions](#assumptions)
5. [Concept](#concept)
6. [References](#references)

# Overview

After a notification is created and approved, relevant policies must be verified before it can be sent.
There are three possibilities:
1. All constraints are fulfilled. The notification may be sent.
2. The policy is expired (validUntil DateTime < current DateTime). The notification is not permitted to be sent.
3. One or more policy-based constraints are not fulfilled. The notification is not permitted to be sent.

Policies are stored in the IRS' policy store. The IRS provides a policy store API to create, fetch and verify policies.

# Summary

If the notification may not be sent after the policy verification, the user must be notified properly.
The status of the notification must be updated accordingly.

# Requirements

- During policy check, throw separate Exceptions based on the type of failure.
  - If policy is not valid -> UsagePolicyExpiredException
  - If policy is valid but notification not permitted -> UsagePolicyPermissionException
- New quality investigation & alert status: "Failed"
  - Notification set to this status, when it could not be sent due to the policy exceptions

> - Error text message informing the user of the exception

Reviewer: Toast messages

### Frontend

After creating and approving the notification and one of the exceptions is thrown:

> 1. An error text message must be shown to the user

Reviewer: Toast message
